---
layout: page
permalink: /teachings/ue19cs322-big-data/a1/
title: "UE19CS322: Assignment 1"
nav: false
---

## Analysis of US Road Accident Data using MapReduce

This is the first assignment for the UE19CS322 Big
Data Course at PES University. The assignment consists of 2 tasks and focuses on running MapReduce jobs to
analyse data recorded from accidents in the USA.

The files required for the assignment can be found [here](https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1oxwATscIyOc4vG_HYaAz1QpEItHcsREp?usp=sharing).

## Assignment Objectives and Outcomes

1. This assignment will help students become
   familiar with the Map Reduce programming environment and the HDFS.
2. At the end of this assignment, the student will
   be able to write and debug MapReduce code.

## Ethical practices

Please submit original code only. You can discuss
your approach with your friends but you must write original code. All solutions must be submitted through the
portal. We will perform a plagiarism check on the code and **you will be penalised if your code is found
to be plagiarised**.

## The Dataset

You will be provided with a link to the dataset on
PESU Forum. You will be working with the following set of attributes.

| Key | Type | Description |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Severity | integer | Severity of the accident (between 1 - 4) |
| Start\_Time | datetime | Start time of accident in local time zone |
| Start\_Lat | float | Latitude as GPS coordinate of the start point |
| Start\_Lng | float | Longitude as GPS coordinate of the start point |
| Description | string | Natural language description of the accident |
| Visibility(mi) | float | Visibility (in miles) during the accident |
| Precipitation(in) | float | Precipitation amount in inches, if there is any |
| Weather\_Condition | string | Weather condition during the accident - rain, snow, thunderstorm, fog, etc |
| Sunrise\_Sunset | String | Shows the period of day (i.e. day or night) during the accident |

## Software/Languages to be used:

1. Python `3.8.x`
2. Hadoop `v3.2.2` only

## Marks

Task 1: 2 marks  
Task 2: 2 marks  
[Report](https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSecvOf85Lld8KePDfXVoZfIKCuBV5UAELuzn0u1dhd1AuYtFg/viewform?usp=sf_link): 1 mark

## Tasks Overview:

1. Load the data into HDFS.
2. Create `mapper.py` and `reducer.py` for Task 1 and Task 2
3. Run your code on the sample dataset until you get the right answer
4. Submit the files to the portal
5. Submit one page report based on the template and answer the questions on the report

## Submission Date

16th September, 11:59 PM

## Submission Guidelines

You will need to make the following changes to your `mapper.py` and `reducer.py` scripts to run them on the portal:

1. Include the following `shebang` on the first line of your code

   ```
   #!/usr/bin/env python3
   ```
2. Convert your files to an executable

   ```
   chmod +x mapper.py reducer.py
   ```
3. Convert line breaks in `DOS` format to `Unix` format (this is **necessary** if you are coding on Windows)

   ```
   dos2unix mapper.py reducer.py
   ```

## Task Specifications

### Task 1

#### Problem Statement

Find record count per hour

#### Description

Find the number of accidents occurring per hour that satisfy a set of conditions and display them in sorted fashion.

All the following conditions must be satisfied by a record:

| Attribute | Condition |
| --- | --- |
| Description | Accident should result in either a "lane blocked", "shoulder blocked" or an "overturned vehicle" |
| Severity | >= 2 |
| Sunrise\_Sunset | Night |
| Visibility(mi) | <= 10 |
| Precipitation(in) | >= 0.2 inches |
| Weather\_Condition | Should either be "Heavy Snow", "Thunderstorm", "Heavy Rain", "Heavy Rain Showers" or "Blowing Dust" |

#### Comments

Ignore records which do not satisfy the mentioned conditions. Additionally, if any of the required attributes contain `NaN`, ignore the record.

Recommended module: `datetime`

#### Output Format

For each hour that contains accident data satisfying the provided conditions, print the hour followed by the number of accidents on a separate line.

### Task 2

#### Problem Statement

Find record count per city and state

#### Description

Find the number of accidents occurring per city and state where the distance between the start coordinates and a given pair of coordinates (`LATITUDE`, `LONGITUDE`) is within `D` using Euclidean Distance.

For each record, make a `POST` request to obtain the city and state information. The expected JSON payload format:

```json
{
    "latitude": Start_Lat,
    "longitude": Start_Lng
}
```

You are required to take 3 command line arguments in your `mapper.py` script:

```
LATITUDE LONGITUDE D
```

#### Output Format

For each state, display the state name, followed by each city and its accident count, then the state total.

## Helpful Commands

### Running MapReduce without Hadoop

```
cat path_to_dataset | python3 mapper.py [args] | sort -k 1,1 | python3 reducer.py [args] > output.txt
```

### Starting Hadoop

```
$HADOOP_HOME/sbin/start-all.sh
```

### Running a MapReduce Job

```
hadoop jar path-to-streaming-jar-file \
-input path_to_input_folder_on_hdfs \
-output path_to_output_folder_on_hdfs \
-mapper absolute_path_to_mapper.py \
-reducer absolute_path_to_reducer.py
```
